I mean, my own city, but it's a book too.
I guess in general, I wonder if you could just give me some thoughts on your body of work as an evolving literary form, the essay as a, I mean, you must see this as a corpus of work, certainly.
Yeah, I mean, in the prefaces to the various volumes, probably more than this than anything else I've
try to figure that out retrospectively, but it's retrospective.
I never, I don't, maybe that's why it works, if it works as a body, because I, if you're self-consciously trying to build an effort, probably it wouldn't work, it should be too vain, it should be too rigid.
I never think about that.
I just write an essay every month.
And when I was first asked, it's not as though I had plans to become a
writer of general science.
I had only written technical articles.
They knew me around the museums.
I've been a graduate student there, and I had done one piece for them on Irish Elves as a regular piece, but I didn't really even know what an essay was.
I didn't formally study literature.
I liked essays.
I knew Huxley's work and Haldane's, and I think they was, I don't want to sound pretty idiotic, I'd probably read Montaigne in colleges, because I had a decent
pretty classical education.
I'm sure I read some one thing.
So in some sense I knew, but it's not as I went into this knowing that I wanted to write essays.
In fact, I didn't even know what I was doing with called essays.
If you look at my earlier ones, I call them columns, and at some point I realized I started calling them essays, because I realized that these days were what they were.
I discovered for myself a very old genre.
Every time I put out one of these books, and this is the seventh, I just look at the last 35 or 40.
I throw out a few I don't like anymore.
And they seem to always fall together in reasonable groupings, but they're not planned in advance now.
But the volumes do differ.
They do, and this is three years of, this I guess represents basically three years of work.
Yeah.
But there is, you must be mindful of the fact that you're not reading yourself basically.
I mean, there are themes certainly that you come back to.
When I started writing them, I was in my early 30s.
A person in their early 30s is going to be thinking differently than a person verging on their mid-50s, as I am now.
Also, climates have changed.
It is interesting for me to look back through them.
If I look at the first book, Ever since Darwin, which I don't like that much anymore, because I hope I've gotten better, those are the first attempts of the Darwinian essayists.
That is, they lay out some very basic material in Darwinism, which I wouldn't
for the most part, write about now.
I'd be too didactic.
I include material like that, because a lot of people don't know it.
I always do, and I always will.
And then you sort of go along in the series, and the panda's thumb seems to emphasize some of the difficulties of darkness, which I've laid out the basic stuff.
And then you look at the third one, hen's teeth and horses' toes, and
was written in the midst of all this creationism nonsense when they were powerful in the late 70s before we beat them in the supreme court there's a lot of contemporary politics and historical also i was writing this mismeasure of men then and then uh you go along flamingo smile bully for brontosaurus and you see that i sort of discovered history and contingency and an interest in it and so yeah they do uh they do alter but
There's nothing I've ever sat down.
In fact, the only way I find out that they've altered is when I look at them.
Well, you mentioned your first book, which you just said you don't much care for anymore.
Given the chance, are you one of these perfectionists who would like to go back and tinker?
Oh, no.
No, no.
Or is it completed work?
No, history.
Omar Khayyam was right.
Moving finger rights and having read moves on, right?
What was that for again?
I love that.
Oh, my God.
I was moving your rights and having wit.
Moose on, or all your piety, no wit, can cause it to cancel half a line, or all your tears.
Wipe out a word of it.
You're from a generation that had to memorize those things, right?
You mentioned, you know, I went to Bates, which is not unlike the... Yeah, no, in fact, I considered Bates.
The only reason I... I almost applied there.
I liked Bates, and I didn't because they didn't have a geology department.
I remember there was a course in geology, which is rather rudimentary.
Yeah, no, there was no department.
There may be now.
Well, it's interesting.
I like this, actually.
You actually have always wanted to, I mean, this is something that you set your mind on.
This is your profession from childhood, isn't it?
Right.
And that's really pretty spectacular.
Well, you know, maybe, but it's not rare for paleontology.
I'll tell you, sort of, I just want to say one more thing about the tinkering.
The main reason I wouldn't tinker is that
it's not that i have a ridiculously developed sense of my place it isn't that it's that these books are written at moments in history they're going to go into the dustbin also but yeah you don't want to mess around with it i mean wonderful since people ask me do you want to are you going to put up an updated version of wonderful life or or i'm talking about our first technical book
I wouldn't do that.
It was written in 1989.
It's the way things look at the moment.
If I want to revisit a subject, I'd write another book, because there's, you don't want to, the books have structure, you know?
Yeah.
Yeah, if something that I've once said would prove to be totally wrong, well, I'd probably just withdraw the book, but, uh... Can you think of anything after that?
I bet you really can't give them the... Oh, sorry, essays, of course, because, I mean, you can't write 250 essays and not... Yeah.
not have some of them turn out wrong.
Oh, sure, there's a one in Emerson Starwin on Eight Language, which I now believe doesn't amount to anything, and then, you know, I'd probably deep six, although there are other parts of that essay that are pretty good.
No, I was going to say with respect, a lot of people seem quite amused or interested by this story about me visiting the Museum of Natural History when I was five, but it's not, I've always wondered why people like that story so much, because
It's not rare for paleontologists.
Well, I think we see a lot of ourselves in it.
I mean, I would have loved to have been an archaeologist for now as a kid.
But it's interesting.
If you survey people in most professions, I suppose it's true that most people wander into it in college years.
But if you survey paleontologists, a lot of them are
ones who just promoted a childhood fascination.
It's not rare.
A lot of paleontologists began in small children in cities, either going to museums in cities or living in rural or farm areas and collecting fossils in their local region.
A lot of my colleagues were into it as kids.
Did you have any, this would really be a very pressing idea, which I'm sure you have, but
You know, one of the byproducts of your work is that you have really made science very accessible and very likable, user-friendly, to use a horrible cliché.
But you certainly have millions of people, many, many thousands of great work.
That's good.
Evolution's a good subject.
I mean, were you mindfully pursuing, mindfully trying to seek out
a popular audience?
No, I don't think that works.
I think you have to write essays for yourself.
It may sound selfish, but it's not meant to be, unless you... Yeah, but they're so accessible, though.
I mean, you're not writing... Oh, well, sure.
There's no obvious obfuscation here.
I mean, you're writing... No, I'm writing them, so... But I don't write them any... If I were writing them only for my professional colleagues, I'd write them the same way.
That is, there's no simplification of concepts.
There's no simplification of language.
No, I want them to be readable by everyone.
But this is an old, as I like to say, it's an old tradition that goes back to Galileo, who chose to write both his books as dialogues in Italian and not as treatises in Latin, rather that Copernicus's was a Latin treatise, his most scientific books were.
The notion that you can present science, not watered-down science, but real science for a literate audience of general readers, a lot of people think that Darwin's Origin of Species is a popularization of something
of some technical article that must be in a journal somewhere, and it isn't.
That's just how he presented the material to the world, which, when you think about it, is a great part of humanism.
If I'm trying to do anything, it's to recover that.
I just read something that, I forget where I read it, but when you think of the great scientific texts, that really is one that's in print and that's read, you know, as opposed to someone who's ever read, you know, The Principia.
I can tell you, I've never tried it.
Right, no, even in English it's not readable.
But basically Darwin did write this extraordinary... Yeah, and the Galileo Congress is good, because you have, as you correctly say, you have Copernicus in the generation before him, Newton in the generation after him, writing in the conventional mode, which are treatises in Latin.
And here's Galileo, writes both his major books as dialogues in Italian.
You know, it's really quite something.
And is there any...
understanding of why he did this and beyond the fact i don't know enough no i i think it's wonderful i think the answer is look at what brecht actually makes a big point of in galileo now we know that brecht brecht's galileo is a 20th century boxer's version it's different but but brecht says in the play and i think i think he's actually right i mean he interprets it too politically that galileo did it to speak to the common man against the church i don't think that's right no i think he did it because he he wanted
He wrote to be read.
He was a reader.
He knew that his potential supporters were, after all, not the church and university, which was so high about his potential supporters, was the rising mercantile class of Italy.
Not what he did for Brecht's proletarian motives, certainly not.
He was writing for a wealthy businessman, if anything.
Now, we know you grew up in New York, and you mentioned going to the museum, where your first impressions were made.
What's your take on the dinosaurs that we're down there?
Oh, I love the new mammal hall.
There's an essay in there.
I don't know.
You see, the thing is that by redoing the mammals in this conceptually different way, that is, clavistically, by order of their time and branching, you do something that's conceptually quite innovative, because humans are on an early branch.
We end up not at the end of the hall, the traditional position, but about a third of the way through.
And people say, why are humans off in a corner?
Humans are supposed to be at the end, is the crown.
And then you start thinking about it.
Problem is, there isn't a similar false icon of dinosaurs.
So if you reorganize dinosaurs by timing of their branching, which is what they did.
See, the old dinosaur hall there were by geological time.
They had one hall for Jurassic dinosaurs, one for Cretaceous dinosaurs.
In the new one, they've just done it by branching order.
And they have one hall for Ornithysian dinosaurs and one for Sorskian dinosaurs.
But so what?
There's no popular myth that's exploded by this reordering, whereas for the mammals there is a popular myth that's exploded.
So, therefore, it really just becomes a question of aesthetics.
It's very hard to see the hall because it's so crowded.
Kids all the time, which is wonderful.
But for my taste, it's a little dizzy.
It's a little overly crowded, the majesty.
of the spacing of the old hall has not been retained.
And also, even though they had to do it, I would have done it too, the new postures, which have Tyrannosaurus with a horizontal vertebral column, makes them quite low to the ground, he just looks so much less scary and so much less majestic than in the old vertical post.
They had to do it because they couldn't in any honesty have done anything else.
It's not a criticism.
It's just the way science works.
Being a traditionalist, certainly in this area, I'll bet, just to totally jump subjects here, that I'm reading that they're proposing interleague play between the American and the National League.
Well, you know, it's a funny thing.
It isn't driving me nuts.
I'm a great baseball traditionalist, and I'm against the extra tiers of playoffs.
I'm against grass.
I have artificial turf, and I'm against big ballparks.
You can't find anyone more traditional than me.
But I actually don't object that much to interleague play, and I'll tell you why.
I mean, the whole system arose capriciously, its contingency again, because when the National League was founded, pardon me, when the American League was founded in 1901, the National League was so haughty about it, they really were trying to, I mean, McGraw wouldn't play the 1904 World Series against Boston because, you know, he thought the American League was such an upstart, which was the only year it was canceled, because Hocking was striking, quote me.
That's why I like it.
So I think it was anomalous from the start that there wasn't in the league.
The one good thing about not having in the league play is it makes the World Series.
But the World Series is so degraded anyway by having two layers of play.
It doesn't matter.
Any other wild card bullshit.
So why not have in the league play?
And also, it's funny, it's the one reform I don't really object to.
It makes sense, especially if they do it locally.
It's good for rivals.
Where were you on the DH?
I'm against the DH.
The one good thing about the DH is that it does allow older players like Reggie Jackson and David Winfield to hang around.
That's good, because fans like to see them.
But they used to hang around as pinch hitters, so they got a little less work.
But the main thing about the DH is it's just so destructive of interesting strategies.
When you have the pitcher having to hit, there's just so much more in the way of... Remember the old batting orders of our youth, still in the National League, where because you had a weak ninth hitter, you would construct the batting order in such a way.
Now there's no variation to it.
You just throw all your good hitters in.
The National League play is much more interesting than that, so I'd love to see them get rid of it.
And maybe the one good thing about Interleague players, they will,
If Jumaati had lived, they'd have probably not heard of him.
I know he wasn't.
There was the greatest tragedy that hit Martin Baseball was the death of Jumaati.
I don't know.
I mean, he was marvelous for us intellectuals verbally.
I'm not sure he was as much of a leader.
He was powerful in that respect.
The only good thing about that strike is that
Texas was going to make the playoffs and they were an under 500 team.
Wouldn't that have been something?
Okay, here's your trivia question.
What's the lowest percentage that ever got in the World Series?
I couldn't answer it.
73 Mets.
They were one game over 500.
One game over 500.
It's hard to do with only two divisions.
Four or three.
With a wild card.
Oh, no, it's easy.
We're going to get under 500.
The Mets were one game above 500 because the whole Eastern Division of the National League in 73 was so terrible.
And they lost the series pretty quickly, so they deserved it.
Getting back to museums, which you write about in this book, I love museums.
I love the whole concept of them.
And maybe you could just talk a little bit about your feeling about museums.
The main point I hit in the book is that I don't like the way... There's such a... Let me just see.
I'm sorry.
There's such a temptation if you're running a museum to consider only bottom lines.
It's just the nature of business.
Now, I don't want anybody to go bankrupt, so I'm not going to... I'm enough of a realist that there's nothing to do to preserve your institution and do something that's a little morally suspect.
As long as it isn't too morally suspect, that may not be what I wouldn't choose to be in the business.
But what museums are doing...
is basically to turn themselves into theme parks a lot of them and it just won't work they will get more bodies in because people love theme parks that is take out specimens i'm just a few specimens put in a lot of computer screens a lot of things that move a lot of buttons to press a lot of hokey flashing lights kids love them they pack them in you get a big gift shop you make a lot of t-shirts and coffee mugs look i hate to
be negative towards local institutions, but I'll never forget when the Museum of Science, which I love in its own way, they spent years raising money for this new wing.
They didn't do anything else.
What did they put in it?
A restaurant, a gift shop, and an omnimax theater.
It's all that's in there.
You know, that's crazy.
The point is, we can't compete with theme parks on their own terms.
And I say this as someone who doesn't hate, I'm not one of these
Ivory Tower intellectuals, I love theme parks.
They're just different from museums.
The theme parks are a place where you're supposed to entertain and be at the height of technology.
It's very exciting.
And if you teach a little bit, that's great.
I love the Disney World.
I adore it.
But it is what it is.
Museums are places where you're supposed to display authentic specimens of nature and teach people.
And if you turn your museum into a theme park, there's more people who come in.
You're going to be lost in this never-never land.
You destroy your own integrity.
You'll never be as good.
It's the real theme park, so you don't have the resources or the money.
But the best example are these stupid dinosaur models that growl.
First of all, they have no scientific content because the only things that are exciting about them, namely their sounds and their colors, are the things we absolutely know nothing about.
So that's all guesswork.
Now, I don't even, again, I'm not a purist.
If you use those silly model dinosaurs, if you put them in your own dinosaur hall and you use them as a device for getting people in to see the real dinosaurs, okay, I'll live with that.
I don't love it.
But too often that's not done because, you see, they put them in a separate place because they charge separate admission to it.
There have been some stories.
I tell one in there.
There was one university that shall remain nameless which brought in these tech
dinosaurs in order to, they said, bring people into their own museum, but then they found they didn't fit.
So they ended up putting them in a building on the other side of campus, and fewer people went to the real museum as a result.
I won't use it.
It's Michigan, but you can't.
I'd love to know.
Have you read Lawrence Weschler's new book, or Mr. Wilson's calendar?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Cute little concept.
Yeah, yeah, it is.
I knew about Jurassic, the Jurassic Museum, because my colleague, Rosie Purcell, had been there.
So I actually knew, but it's a nice little book.
I mean, he's marvelous because he's so arch, the guy who runs that thing, because he talks so serious about the things he makes up, and some of them are true.
I reviewed that book for the Washington Post, and I put in, you know, because the whole thing here is, could it be true, right?
Well,
Oh, there is such a museum.
Yeah, but I mean that even some of the stuff.
Some of the stuff is true.
You're not supposed to give away special effects for the movie.
I did that.
A few of the things he has in this museum are absolutely true.
What's marvelous about him is he's the true postmodern museum director.
He makes no distinction between truth and falsity.
And he's so carefully true about some of them, to be honest, he talks the same way.
That's a wonderful setup.
But the problem is that you really have to
know museums and the tradition to really see what he's doing, and I don't know how many people get it.
Well, the Wunderkammer explains that.
Yes, no, the Wunderkammer.
Look, I'm a sort of specialist on the Wunderkammer tradition with Rosie.
I have my antiquarian books in New York, so they're not here.
I can show you some, but I actually have a collection of the books of the old Wunderkammer.
Now, of course, with the Wunderkammer, they had a different aesthetic.
I mean, they thought they were getting things that were true,
But of course, because they didn't distinguish well between the fable and fact, they ended up with things that are fables.
The Jurassic guy has a whole different notion.
He ends up with something like a Olympic comic, but he's got different motors.
I love that book with Rosie that you did, Find His Keeper.
Yeah, that just kind of fell between the cracks.
That's one of my one commercial failure, but it's a success in this theme.
Oh, it's nice.
In fact, I was going to put it in a bibliography of my own book, but I really didn't do it book collecting.
I did a book collecting.
What's your book?
It's A Gentle Madness.
It's about bibliomania.
It was shortlisted for the NBCC yesterday.
Oh, good.
I haven't seen it.
It's got the Durer engraving on the book.
Oh, is that the one that Smithsonian did?
No, Holt.
Holt did it.
But it's a big format.
No, no, it's a regular book book.
I don't know.
I'd like to see it.
Make sure you get a copy, because I'm actually working on it.
Is that book collecting?
It's about, yeah, it's about book collecting, really.
Well, I am doing a proposal for my next book, and there is a chapter that, I will get this on tape for you, but I'm thinking about, I would love to include maybe you in this, Maurice Sendak in it, Umberto Eco, and how your things, you know, do they actually,
enter into the creative process oh i use my yes no you see i'm not a collector for collecting sake uh although i love books i will only buy things and spend money on things that i might use and i know about half my essays come out of the books in my own library so i really use them also i'm now living in new york and i'm an absolutely wonderful library the soho loft so you ought to come down and see well is this something that's worth pursuing do you think how these
I mean, with Echo, it's absolutely true.
Unbelievable.
Did you read his latest book?
Oh, I did.
He's a beautiful writer.
Weaver is a wonderful translator.
Weaver is a great translator.
It's a wonderful, he's a magnificent translator.
He deserves it.
I've looked at the original Italian to some of them, which I read, and he's just, you know, to capture
I didn't capture that.
In English, it's as good as the Italians.
I don't know him, but he is.
I don't think people really appreciate him.
He's won a lot of prizes, doesn't he?
Yeah, he has.
Everyone knows.
He's clearly the great translator.
And he's one of the few people who, the translator, who gets almost the same size of type on the
I mean, I would buy a book.
I think he did Calvino, didn't he do?
Probably.
But I'll tell you, the thing is, I saw Invento a few years, and he said, you're going to love my third book.
I think The Name of the Rose, and I know not everybody, but I think The Name of the Rose is the finest book I've read in the last 20 years.
It's got depth that people never saw.
The problem is you've got to know all the languages he knows.
Maybe I get one reference in five.
I think I get a lot more than most people because my mind works the way he does.
But he writes his book so carefully, so if you don't get any of his references, you can still, it doesn't matter.
For instance, this latest book, the first 300 pages are magnificent, but very few readers are going to know what it's about.
What it's really about is the transition from the Neoplatonic to the mechanical worldview, which I think is the greatest conceptual transformation for science in the history of Western thought.
He captures that beautifully, the contrast between the Jesuit and the... But then the last 200 pages are lost in this reverie about the difference between fiction and fact, which just doesn't interest me as much as literary theory.
But the first part, no one has written... I mean, if you know Athanasius Kierke, who's the prototype of his Jesuit, who was the last great Jesuit Neoplatonist, who in the 17th century was as famous as Newton, but has been forgotten because his worldview's gone.
And you see what, that book is brilliant, but nobody's going to get it.
But I think his genius is such that it still offers its rewards for millions of other readers, and if they get it, terrific.
How many serious readers are there in the world?
I mean, I've heard the number of maybe...
50,000 in the United States.
Yeah.
But the problem with that book, as opposed to the name of the rose, there isn't much more than his allusion.
Allusion.
There isn't enough story, and that's why it's not going to do as well.
But he told me, you know, the story of how he actually had this book, you know, in his library for the name of the rose, and it was up there.
Which one?
In his library.
What the hell was it?
It was an Aristotle that he picked up for like nothing at a flea market.
That was years earlier, and he found it.
And he said, and it was ugly, but it was old, and it was distasteful, but maybe this thing was there, you know.
Plus, he said he's been pressed in jeopardy of having his apartments collapse under the weight of these 25,000 books.
But I think he'd be really very, very good.
And Sendak's collection, you know, of Melville stuff and everything.
And now he did this Pierre book, but his collection is said to be
Absolutely.
I guess I have heard that.
Mine is idiosyncratic, but it's good.
Yeah, but I really see your, you know, this is not just science.
You have an antiquarian sense, I think, which, and also a very humanistic sense, which comes through.
And I have to believe that these things that you gather, talk to me about things.
I mean, do you have a passion for things as artifacts?
Not really.
I used to.
When I was a kid, I was a very...
avid collector of everything kids collect.
I started my stamp collection, my coin collection, my matchbook collection.
I collected everything.
But, you know, when I came here in 1967, I came here with the six boxes of fossils that I'd painfully collected all my life, and I was curator of 15,000 drawers of fossils.
That killed it.
And it absolutely killed it.
I believe in accumulation, but I just don't believe private people.
should have it just for their delectation.
I mean, I don't have a moral objection to this.
It's just nothing I would choose to do.
I collect books because I use them.
I don't actually believe in private collecting merely for collection's sake.
I don't object to anyone who does it, but I believe in public collecting in public's sake.
Do you get a feeling, though, when you pick up something that's, like if you pick up, I don't know, a First Copernicus?
Oh, sure.
That you get it.
Oh, absolutely, and I will do anything, whenever I try to work from originals, even if they're facsimiles.
Oh, yeah, that's good.
Oh, yeah, no, just, you're absolutely right.
That's why museums will not fail, and that is why the theme park shouldn't take over from the museum.
Fortunately, for some internal reason that I don't understand, authenticity stirs the human soul.
You know, my favorite story I tell in one of those essays, but I'll repeat it, it's a great story, it's just, it's true.
former director of the Air and Space Museum told me this.
They had a group of blind visitors in one day for a consultation on how to make the museum more accessible.
And you know, they have all the major planes hung from the ceiling in the Great Hall.
Lindbergh Spirit of St.
Louis is there.
I don't think there's some interesting story about the Wright Brothers plane.
Yeah, maybe they can finally get it back.
Well, it was eight years ago.
I don't know.
Yeah.
No, there was something interesting.
You see the story about that is that Langley,
the director of the Smithsonian at the turn of the century, was also a pretender, in the old sense of maintaining, not faking, to patents on early flight, and he and the Wright brothers had a terrible spat, so they didn't, I think they eventually got the plane.
But anyway, because these planes are sitting there inaccessible to the blind, the director explained to this group of visitors that it really wasn't anything, that was the only place he could hang them, and he realized that was a problem, and he was, he
He was wondering if there's anything they could do to make the situation better.
So he said, would it help, for example, if we made a model of the spirit of St.
Louis?
And Scott visited his caucus, and they came back with the most wonderful answer.
They said, yes, that would be very helpful, but you have to place it right under the original.
Isn't that wonderful?
They can't perceive it.
It's just the knowledge.
See, it's an intellectual thing.
It's not, or it's a visceral thing.
But it's in the head.
It's the knowledge that this model is underneath the absolutely unperceivable original, makes it meaningful.
That's why museums are going to survive, because people love authentic objects as they should.
Now, you see the Rosetta Stone in the British Museum.
It's no better than its replicas.
I can't tell the difference.
But I know that's the stone that Champollion read.
I know that's the... I describe in my book, when I went to see William Scheide,
His private collection is at the Firestone Library.
It is.
I mean, he chooses not to give it.
Fine.
And he goes to his... I didn't realize that when you are writing, you do really write.
Always.
And you do feel that that has an effect.
Oh, and in many cases, of course, there's no alternative.
16th, 17th century Latin treatises in natural history.
There are no translations, there are no facsimiles.
I mean, if you want to read, you know, Scheutz's Physica Sacre, you've got to read it.
There's nothing else.
This is not for this piece, and I'll tell you, by the way, later who I write for.
Yeah, okay.
And what's your schedule?
I've got to leave about 10.
Okay, we'll get 15 minutes or so.
Where was I going?
I said this wasn't for this piece.
come to it.
So tell me then about, you know, this whole concept of evolution just seems that you never, it never tires, it never fails to... I don't think it ever will, because first of all, it's the focal concept of the biological sciences, so it is the one integrated concept in the whole enormous discipline.
Also, it's a theory that's very rich, parts of it are controversial, not the
basic stuff.
It applies to everything.
It has more social implications than any major scientific theory.
And it applies to millions of fascinating animals and plants out there.
I don't know.
People ask me, how do you do this every month?
It's no problem.
Well, journalists don't ask me if they like every day, every week.
But I'm not sure if my field was physics that you could sustain 50 monthly essays, because the theory is as rich in physics, but you don't have any objects.
I think that's what keeps it going.
You've got so many kinds of organisms.
What do you feel when you say, I realize this is a different field, but when you see this picture that the Hubble takes, goes into this corner of space, and now they say, 50 billion more galaxies.
It's just amazing how...
It's totally insignificant.
Everything and everybody is here.
And I suppose there are parallels with what you can learn here on Earth.
I don't know if that's a question or not.
I just got a review copy.
I totally ignored the hardcover work here.
The paperback of the bell curve is up.
Yeah, I know.
I've got a revision of the Mismeasure of Man.
It's coming out in a month or two.
Really?
Any comment that you can... I know you've talked about the bell curve in the past.
It's a very long book about a very simple argument that's wrong.
Does it offend you when you see it?
Yeah.
People are using it now as justifications for everything.
No, it takes a lot of social harm.
The argument, which I think is conclusively disproven, is no different.
It's funny, when I revised The Mismeasure of Man,
The revision has a long preface about the history of biology that turned in the last 20 years.
I added five essays, three of which I haven't been republished before, so it's a new book in that sense, but I didn't alter the text at all.
Now, this whole thing is a response to the bell curve, and I said, wait a minute, I wrote The Miss Measurement in 1984.
How can I not alter the main text and claim that it's an answer to a book written in 1995?
But it is.
The point is that argument is,
You see, The Mismeasure of Man is not, a lot of people misunderstand it, if you read it carefully, it's not a general attack on all biological determinants.
It's a very specific book against the theory of unitary innate intelligence.
That is the idea that intelligence can be abstracted as a single number, measuring an innate property that can't be altered substantially.
And that's what the bell curve's about.
They didn't add anything new.
I wrote The Mismeasure of Man in 1984, but part of it was a response to...
to the article Dick Harnstein had written in Atlantic Monthly in 1971.
They didn't change anything in The Bell Curve.
So in a funny sense, even though it's anachronistic, The Mismeasure of Man published ten years before The Bell Curve is the answer to The Bell Curve, because it's the same argument.
And I did think of the other question.
I mean, we are approaching the millennium.
We've written about it often.
My next book is going to be, I hope, to be a continuum.
I'm going to go look at it.
go to these great shrines like the Library of Pergamum and just carry it forward and then maybe spend a couple weeks in Seattle to where they're proposing what books of the future are going to be like.
Do you have any anxiety about the future of the book as we know it?
I'm not a great futurist and I still type on a typewriter, as you know.
I just
somehow think that the book will survive, at least into the immediate future, pretty much in its current form.
There are more and more people, people don't like to read screams.
You can't take them to bed, you can't take them on the bus, you can't, oh, I suppose fancy things can happen.
Maybe we'll get books with holographic and moving images, which are cute and all that, but I think people like books.
And I don't think they've got to stop liking them.
The parallel I make, and I cut myself badly shaving this morning, is that, you know, remember when electric shavers came in, we were all going to get rid of our... Yeah.
Never happened, right?
So, I mean, this is the perfect example.
That is a great example.
Wet shaver's never been more popular.
I mean, who would use an electric shaver?
Yeah, it's crazy.
Good old Gillette technology is good.
When I take a laptop to bed, don't you love to pick up a binding, an old book?
I have a cabinet at home, all old books, and when you open it, it's just... Yeah, it won't go away.
It's not going to go away.
It's like nectar the way it comes out.
I don't have too much anxiety.
At least for the near future.
How about the digitization of all this information and images and stuff?
Well, I see a lot of wonderful friends at the National Museum of American Art in Washington.
They are doing a project to put on—get this, this would never be done before.
I happen to like Civil War statuary.
I don't think it's—it's not that it's good artistically, it's just so wrenching historically.
Every little town in America has a Civil War statue on the green, right?
They're doing a project where they're going to take photographs of every one of these.
Isn't that wonderful?
Isn't that marvelous?
You could not do that before.
You couldn't do it in a book.
There's thousands and thousands and thousands of them, and most of them aren't worth that much.
But that happened in one place?
Sure.
And even eventually to have it into technology where you can walk around it and really... Oh, that's good.
Gates buys up all the Barnes, the Whites.
Right.
And you can't even get in to see those paintings.
If you're in Philly, they make it hard.
There's nothing like seeing the original, but to have a disc that has every painting in the Hermitage, which not everybody can get to every day.
I tried to get to the Vermeer, you know, over Christmas with my kids.
They're going to close it down.
Right, yeah.
Thanks a lot.
I called, I got press passes because the tickets were impossible.
I do all that, and I still can't get this.
I brought over three of my English friends who came to visit me in January, a once-in-a-lifetime thing in New York.
Couldn't get to the Statue of Liberty in Ellis Island, which they wanted to see.
Couldn't get there.
There's plenty else to do.
You mentioned Civil War statues.
You know, there's one in Martha's Vineyard of a Confederate soldier, which is amazing.
Where is it?
Right in Oak Bluffs.
And I forget what the reasoning is for that.
But no, it's very, very interesting.
I mean, that's the only one I think you'll find in the North, you know.
And they've even painted it.
It's gray, you know.
I mean, I hope they get this in there.
It's a peculiarity.
Yeah.
I know you've got a 10 o'clock gig.
Is it possible for me to contact you down the line about this next book?
I'll be happy to send you a copy of my book if you'd like this.
It's a lot of fun.
The irony is that Agassiz, who was the last great scientific creationist, opened this building the same year that Darwin published The Origin of Species.
This is the first edition, the original building and the four rooms in that direction.
And this obviously was an exhibit hall, so we were going to paint this years ago, and they washed the walls.
Oh, I wouldn't know.
No, no.
They washed the walls down, and this writing emerged, and I wouldn't let them paint, which is great.
It saved me a lot of time.
So I never realized until they had done that that this was one of the original... Is that right?
Isn't that great?
Nice.
So he lays for the arms that he was going to put into a formal...